It's 14, Valentine's Day, sitting in the basement
of the Weissenbaker building, getting ready to
interview Charlie Holland, who got here a little
more than 50 years ago. Charlie, test your mic.
Testing one, two. Is it all right? Charlie, for
someone who may not have known you in a few years to
come when they're looking at this material or
listening to it, would you begin by summarizing
your background and experience, where you grew
up, went to school, your experience before you got
to Texas A&M? Well, I grew up in western North
Carolina, and my dad was a Baptist minister. In
fact, I started the first grade the year he
finished Wake Forest. He had been in World War I,
and he decided to go down and finish up. So we moved
to Wake Forest, and about Christmas time, My twins
were born, and he took me out of the first grade
because he was afraid I might bring home some
childhood diseases. And then the next year after
that, we moved to Mountain View, and I was just
recently at Christmas going up there looking for
the place that we moved to. It was on a dirt road out
from North Wilkesboro. And this will kind of give
you the view of what things were like in those
times. And he was pastor of a little Baptist church
there, and it was a Baptist junior college high
school. And he taught the mathematics there. And
this was back in time that the Depression was
coming on us out there. And all he got out of that
year's teaching at that little junior college was
an Underwood typewriter, which I have at home.
That was all they could pay. And I went to school. It
was a little one-room school. It was a little
schoolhouse. First grade in the first row, second
grade in the second. Pot-bellied stove. Down at
the bottom on old slick red hill was an outhouse.
And all the kids went to the outhouse. And also the
water was simply a barrel just like you'd see a keg
of beer. And so Dad said, when we went there, I
better put you back in the first grade because I
don't want you to get behind. So I started out in the
first. Well, in that school, you could get.
Promoted. All you had to do was just show you could
do the second grade work. So before the year was
over, I was over in the second grade. Second row.
They'd moved me to the second. So you just changed
seats. You didn't know. No paperwork. Before the
end of the year, I was in the third row. Well, then we
moved to Stony Point, which is about 60 miles from
Charlotte. And it's still very primitive in those
days. But it did have a consolidated school. They
bused all the kids from the county into that
school. So Dad said, well, I know you were in the
third grade there, but I think I'll put you back and
let you do the second over. I don't want you to get
behind. Well, they put me in that second grade, and
I stayed the whole year because they didn't know
how to get me out of it even though I knew it. Well,
right after Christmas, we went back there and was
looking for this. We wanted to go to all the places
that we'd lived. And so we went to North
Wilkesboro, and there was a bypass, and we stopped
at a McDonald's. No. This Mountain View wasn't
even on the map yet. And so we went there to stop at a
McDonald's, and I saw a well-dressed lady over
there. And I went over and struck up a conversation
with her. And I asked her if she knew where Mountain
View was. She said, oh, it's just right up here. You
turn off right up the road here. Now, let me point
out that in those years, Wilkes County was noted to
be the biggest white lightning county in the
United States. And so. She said, yes, I went to
school there, one little one-room schoolhouse
outhouse down at the bottom of the hill. And so then
I went on back and sat down, and she came back over
afterwards. And she told my daughter, or my
sister, that her husband had passed away. And she
says, well, what did he do? She says, oh, he was a
bootlegger. Says that was the only way to make a
living in those years. Didn't the law get after
him? She said, oh, yes, he built time five
different times. So this was kind of the area that I
grew up in. And my dad and I, he was always gone a lot
and so forth. And we just didn't have these
father-to-son talks that you always have
nowadays. You'll hear of, like Andy Hardy and
Judge Stone. The closest we ever came to it was, the
day we were packing the car, he was getting ready to
take me off to this little Baptist Junior College,
Mars Hill, out from Nashville, North Carolina.
And it was always assumed that I'd go to college. It
was never even, we just didn't discuss it. And I
delivered papers there, and I knew all the
professional people in town, and they said,
you've got, there's a lot of emphasis there on you
need to, you need to go to college and make
something yourself. You heard that over and over
again. And so, as we were packing the car, dad said
to me, he says, son, what are you going to study when
you get up there? I said, well, dad, I thought I'd
study dentistry. He said, no, son, I don't think
I'd do that if I were you. I don't believe you'll
ever be able to keep up with your tools. Well, see,
I'd lost his saw and hammer so many times that he was
just, and he said, why don't you just go ahead and
study engineering? Well, that's what I did. And
so, after the pre-engineering course up there,
Mars Hill, I went to North Carolina. And my junior
year, I was having breakfast, and that's when
Pearl Harbor hit. Actually, the day we were
packing the car, the Germans marched in Europe,
which marked the beginning, which is the day I
started to college. And then when I was in my junior
year at North Carolina State, the Germans, the
Pearl Harbor occurred. So I went down, and I didn't
want to get drafted. I wanted to finish school. So
what I did was they had a program there where you
could become, get a direct commission. Even
though you hadn't been in ROTC, they had an ROTC
there, and people marched around all the time. And
they told me I wasn't in point in taking it because I
could only do two years of it, so I didn't take it.
But I went down and got a direct commission to go in
the Navy. And so as soon as I finished college, I had
to go in the Navy. And I was in the Navy and on
destroyers for about, just nearly four years was
the tour date. And the roughest duty that we had was
on Okinawa. We went up there. We went up there with
nine destroyers in the squadron. And this is where
the kamikazes. And for about two or three months,
we were exposed to kamikazes every day. And we lost
six out of our nine destroyers. There were only
three of us that made it back. And it was just a
matter of luck. We weren't that much better. And we
just, when they'd hit one station, we'd be on
another one. Or the plane that was coming in at you,
we got it shot down. Well, then after the war, I
thought about going to Georgia Tech, but it turned
out that there was no housing down there. So I
decided I'd work for Burlington Mills. And they
had put me into a little program that was supposed
to be training the plant managers of the future.
Well, it turned out that it looked like I was going
to have to work on the third shift for about 10
years, 15. So I decided I'd just go back to graduate
school and went back to North Carolina State. And
Dr. Lindsey had taught down there. And so they gave
me his name. I called him. And got in touch with him.
And so we came out here. And I began studying the
graduate program in chemical engineering in
January of 1948. That's it. You came to Texas A&M?
Texas A&M in January 1948. And I promised my wife,
because we'd been out here when I was on the
destroyer, I promised her we'd never stay in
Texas. As soon as I got my degree, we were leaving.
Well, we stayed. Still here. Describe what was...
what Texas A&M was physically. What was... Okay.
What buildings... I'll give you the whole
picture. I have some... A guy named Proctor was one
of the first heads of the extension service, as I
understand. And he was my brother-in-law's... my
brother-in-law's mother's father. He used to be
over here in this same place of research. He used to
have a picture over there. So I... We visited with
the... Mr. Lee's on the way. And Mr. Lee had been
grad... had been taught... He'd been a high school
principal. He'd gone to the old school and studied
the Latin. He was a classical type individual. And
he said... So he called up Bolton. Bolton was the
executive vice president. Said, get this... get
him a room, a place to stay up there. So after I'd
already come here and gotten settled, I was over in
Lindsey's office one day. And Mr. Bolton called up
and he said he wanted to see me. Boy, they were just
shaking over there. I went over. And... So he told
me. But the amusing thing is... And then he ended up
saying, well, just go over here and... Oh, I've
forgotten... Boyette, go see him. He's in charge
of housing. And that was what I got out of him. About
a month or so, we were down there visiting with Mr.
Lee again. He said... He said, well, I suppose you
know Bolton well by now. I said, I'm sorry, Mr. Lee.
Our paths haven't crossed any since that one time I
met him. But Dr. Lindsey was head of the Chemical
Engineering Department. We were over there in the
old Petroleum Building. At that time, Barlow was
Dean of Engineering. And
Saul Wright was head of Civil. Charlie Crawford
was head of Mechanical. Let's
see. Shepard was Dean of Agriculture. Petroleum?
No, Petroleum. Harold Vance was head of
Petroleum. And Shepard was head of Agriculture.
And I don't remember... I remember Mr. Porter was
head of the Math Department. But I don't know... I
don't remember now who was the Science Dean. I
think Pearson was Dean of the Graduate College,
followed later by Trotter. But Pearson, I
believe, was the Dean when I came here. I worked
most of the time, dealt with Trotter's group over
there. And I think that's... Let's see. Street was
teaching drawing. And I can't remember the
fellow. It was head of Aero. And that's about the
one. There were no sidewalks. It was all...
Actually, it was the same way it was in 1943. They
had done nothing during the war. And what I came in,
we had already gotten over the flood here, but
there's still a lot of veterans. And I would say
that that was the toughest group to compete with
I've ever ran against because all they want to know
is what's required. And we'll do it. Because you
and your other veteran buddies, you were
mentally, emotionally mature. Ready to go to
work. Ready to go to work. You'd had experience.
And also, you could separate... I had a family,
too. Everything was riding on it. What was your
graduate student stipend or assistantship or
what? Oh, it was probably about $100 a month. Plus
the GI Bill. I'm not even sure we got $100. Maybe we
did. I don't remember what it was. But it was living
in College View. We could make it. But, see, by the
time I got ready to finish, I ran out of the... I took
a job teaching. I ran out of the GI Bill. So I had to
take a job teaching. And then I had to buy a house
over in College Hills. And I bought one on
Harrington Street over there. It cost $13,700.
And that was the poorest year that I've ever
experienced in my life. My salary was $370. $370 a
month. And Lindsey had to get special
dispensation to get me $370. And so that's kind of
what it was like here then. Now, when did you switch
officially in paperwork from being a graduate
student to being a faculty member? About 52. Okay.
So you're... All right. We're still talking about
the graduate student days. Yeah. Well, I
finished... I got my PhD in 53, but I'd already...
Oh, okay. I took a job as instructor. In 52, I think
it was. And then I believe in... I guess in 53, that
fall, I went ahead... I've forgotten whether I got
promoted to assistant professor. Maybe I went a
year before I got made assistant professor.
Looking back now with the clear vision of
hindsight, what courses and what teachers,
instructors, were the most important to you?
Well, actually, we had some things back then and
there that are better than they are now. And that is
that we took courses outside the department, a lot
of them. And I took mathematics. I had Luther. I had
Bayes. And then Dr. Klippel and I, years later, we
worked on... I'd just go over with him and spend an
hour a day every once in a while. Every week, we'd
have a meeting and prove theorems and so on. And
chemistry, Jensen and Dr. Watson. I worked under
Murdoch, Phil Murdoch in chemical engineering,
but Watson was one of them. Another one that I took
course over there was POTS, organic chemistry.
And Kenny Hancock was another one that I took a
course under. I also took a physics course and Dr.
Weeks taught it. And then after I finished my
coursework, I went back and took another course in
kinetic theory under Dr. Silvey. Which goes way
back. And old Dr. Silvey, the first day, there were
three of us in there registered for his course. And
he, two physics students and me. And he said, he
said, Mr. Tarlin, would you like to participate in
the classroom discussion? And I said, well, I
believe I'd like to do that. Well, what that
amounted to, we were presenting one-third of that
course for audit. Mm-hmm. And then I also had there
one under Dr. Weeks over there. He was the first
one. I took x-rays and crystallography, and I
never had vectors. And he just, he had the course
full of it, but I learned it, picked it up from him.
And I had to compete against two graduate physics
students in there, or three. And so Jensen was an
outstanding chemistry teacher. Watson was an
outstanding chemistry teacher. In fact, all of
those people, Potts was never a real outstanding
teacher. He had a tremendous amount of knowledge,
but he could never finish one sentence until he
started another one. Now, what was his first name?
Because I remember Dr. Potts in agriculture. No,
this was a different Potts. I don't remember what
his first name is. You just have to look it up. What
department? Chemistry. In the chemistry
department? He was the organic prof in chemistry.
Kenny Hancock taught a good course in chemistry.
All right, what about within chemical
engineering? Who were the key? Phil Murdock, I
took a course under him, and
let's see, you know that, I may have taken most all
the courses I took under him. I took one under GL
Fair. He taught process control, and I took that.
But we took, in those years, we were really taking,
see we didn't teach our own mathematics in our
department, and now all these people trying to do,
teach everything in one department, they never
see the light of day outside the walls of their
department. Did anybody, do you remember any
advice that somebody gave you, which later proved
to be very valuable advice to a chemical engineer?
Oh, I don't know. I just kind of stumbled along, I
guess. I very nearly quit shortly after, about
1955, because I went down to Exxon, and that worked
one summer, and they wanted me to stay with Exxon.
And at that time, I was in the lab. I was in the lab. I
was making $5,000 a year, Dr. Harris was making
$5,100 a year, and Dr. Lindsey was making $5,200 a
year. And I was an assistant professor, and both of
them were full, and I figured, well, why should I
stay here when that's all I've got, that's all the
future I've got? So it was, Shirley Lynch,
incidentally, in that old building, was head of
geology over there, and that. What persuaded you
to stay? Well, I just got to thinking about it that,
I don't know.
What had happened was, I had to hurry up and get
through, because that one year, Phil Murdock left
and Watson left, and all my committee left, so I
really pushed that to get it completed.
I wasn't really sure whether I wanted to stay, I
guess, in that corporate structure. You don't
have nears much freedom. What was your
dissertation topic and your area of
specialization? This was, I'd done my Masters on
distillation, and this one was on catalytic,
study of catalyst. And so on my committee I had Dr.
Potts from biology, or Potter. Potter from
biology. And Dr. Weeks, and Dr. Watson, and Phil
Murdock. Yes, that's right. I believe were the
ones on it and I couldn't get that arranged for the
final meeting and I went by Watson's house one
Afternoon late and he was sitting back in the
backyard of the shirt off drinking beer And I told
him I don't know that I'm gonna be able to graduate
this time because I can't get this committee
together Jordan says oh I can take care of that for
you And he went in and called him up and we met over in
the old patrolling building that night He set it up
and we all met over there and I got it over with so I
made it Do you remember any special questions on
that? That final oral exam. I don't remember. I
just remember that They asked me some question and
I guess it's when you're working on some of those
things you got so many Details in your mind. It's
some little simple something You won't see And
they asked me that and then they found the weakness
and so they just I don't remember what it was but
then they just One after another, you know, and
that a part I remember if you know it Let's go on to
the next, you know, but if you ever find something
that you didn't know As you Thought about it then
and now look back How did our chemical engineering
department? How did our strength compare?
nationally in the mid 50s Oh We were really a young
department then we and in fact, we got down Because
the salaries were so poor that at one time We were
down to just Dr. Harry's Dr. Lindsay and I and we had
to get some graduate students help us out So it's
all we could do to keep keep the doors open. You're
saying three faculty we got down to three faculty
Everybody quit because salaries they went to
industry or somewhere Because salaries were so
poor back in those days and that's about when I was
about ready to throw in the towel Was then when
where the real change come was when John Connolly
got in there salaries went up hours went up 30% a
year For three or four years there, but now let's
let's back up John Calhoun came here as Dean in the
50s did Marlowe was head it was Dean when I came here
Okay, and then John Calhoun came next All right Do
you remember any early impressions of Calhoun as
the Dean? I just remember that he was much more
energetic than Well Barlow was energetic enough
except that I thought about Calhoun was a much
better individual and accountant and Barlow was
What did Calhoun did he come over and visit did he
become acquainted with y'all? Oh, yeah, he had us
over He had me over to his office And I think he was
kind of leery of old dr. Lindsay and Doc had already
told him Calhoun told me he says right here's my
Territory no, there's your don't you get in here?
Don't you come across it, but he did ask me one time
He had me in his office talking. I think I irritated
him because he said to me he said Wait, you're
saying he is this Calhoun. That's Calhoun. Okay.
He won't know of any Any a the dis Incentives or
negative things about Lindsay. Mm-hmm. I said
well even if I had some I wouldn't tell you So that
ended that discussion I may have heard his feeling
but because I was pretty loyal to the old doc Was did
the best he could with what he had and he didn't have
much to work with Now the enrollment I'm assuming
in engineering in the 50s was going up. Well, no
actually what happened was enrollment of
everybody's went down to about 1955 was a low
point. Oh, okay. I was after the war is over and this
is about in there somewhere Maybe even after that
they decided that they wanted to make it optional
core a little bit And I think we went on that program
for a little while and the Roman started going up
Then we went back to compulsory for in it. It
started going down again So the enrollment never
you just do everything you wanted to and you
couldn't end up with much more than two sections of
about 20 some each and Y'all still had the graduate
program. Oh, yeah during those dry years and I
presume that industry was generally hiring the
bright Youngsters when they graduated we had we
had they were We were always able to place them and
we helped place all those people the only year that
I couldn't get them placed was I believe in about
1980 when enrollment had just gone out of
proportion and at the same times The job market
dropped completely so we had a real problem then
all right, but then Benson was after bar Calhoun
really wasn't Dean very long right now. He moves up
to what? Oh Was he a system? He was went up to a vice
presidential letter vice president for
engineering, okay, right When did you first meet
Fred Benson? Well, I met him before he became Dean I
knew him because we were both in a naval reserve
unit together, and he wasn't very, and we actually
were taking one of the math courses there together
at one time. He was taking one course, a lower one,
than I was taking. Did he do his degree here? Yeah,
he got his B.S. at Kansas, and then he got a master's
several years back here, as I recall, and then he
was taking some additional courses. Describe
Fred Benson as a human being, as a personality.
Well, we got along just fine. One of the things,
when I got appointed, what he did was call me in one
afternoon, and he said, Charlie, I'd like for you
to take over here as head of the department. I said,
now, you don't have to tell me right now. You can
wait until a little later and tell me if you think it
over. And so I did, and I wasn't really sure I wanted
to. I really wanted to tell him, how about getting
old Doc to take it one more year? I'd like to do the
things I'm doing a little longer. But I decided to
go ahead and take it because I thought that I could
probably do more things that I wanted to do if I were
head than I could if they got somebody from the
outside and he started giving me all kinds of
directions. When was that? What year? That was in
1964. All right. At that point, you said things you
wanted to do. What were your goals? I'd gone to
Exxon in 1955 and gotten started modeling. I was
doing distillation on computers and actually
setting up programs to solve problems on them. And
I worked with them, consulted with them, and I had
graduate students. We'd try out new methods, and
we had an old 650, and that's what they had down at
Exxon. And we had an old 650, and they put it up in the
old EE building. Now, this is an old key punch?
Yeah, yeah. Punch card? In the building. And my
graduate students would go up there and use it at
night. And it had a fire escape, and so they'd go up
the fire escape and run. And we'd run that thing all
night long. That's what we did. That's the way we
got our time. And we had a lot of that going on. I'd
written a book and a good many papers on it of
methods that we had devised to solve these
problems. So this was, at this point, primarily
petrochemically related? Yeah. Or you can do
chemical either one. It's used in both fields, not
just one.
So, I think the way that you're thinking about this
is, and we're going to get back to Benson. Describe
him. What did he like and not like? How did he
operate? Well, he, I think, although he would
claim that he wanted everybody to say what they
wanted to, he really wanted to hear the right
words. And he had around him people that he knew
would always back him up. I remember I used to go in
there to budget hearings. And he'd have Ed Finner.
He'd have old Bain, Spencer, and he'd have two or
three others like that. And he'd say something and
they'd all chime in and agree. But he and I got along
pretty well because I never did go in and ask him to
solve my problems for me. I went ahead and solved
the things. The only time he and I got crosswise was
he was pushing real hard for this Doctor of
Engineering program. And he had all of us
department heads in there one day. And what he was
wanting us to do was agree not to weaken down the
B.S. degree to where it would not be an accredited
degree and have the Doctor of Engineering be the
first accredited degree. And I stood up against
him because I told him that we could not afford to
have a large group of students coming out of here
without an accredited degree. If we're going to
give a B.S. degree, we'd better make it
accredited. And he got so mad at me that he walked
out and stayed gone for about fifteen minutes. And
then we finally decided we'd have it kind of
optional. If they wanted, we'd always have the
B.S. accredited, but if they wanted to go at an
early stage somewhere over to the Doctor of
Engineering, they could. And so we'd just leave it
where whichever one won out would be the way we'd
go. And I told them we were just not big enough. To
fight against the whole United States on one
program like that, they'd run us out of business.
So he and I, and then later he says, Charlie, you can
do whatever you want to. He didn't. But he told me
many times that I had the best department in the
College of Engineering. How long in years was that
Doctor of Engineering degree planned to be? Oh, it
was slightly longer, I think, than a master's. And
it was made up of coursework plus a proper degree.
Oh, okay. I didn't think it was a real problem in the
industry. It was actually a real good degree. It
might fit engineering better than some of the
real, because when you get over too far in the
research, you're nearly like a chemist or a
physicist. And you could make a good program out of
that where you would actually do research on
things that pertain to engineering per se more
than you can on some of the directions they're
going in, because they get toward the science end
of it, and then you're dealing with the of the
chemists and so on so it was a good degree it was just
that i didn't think that we could we could swing it
all right what did happen to it well there's still
it's uh i think they still give some of them that but
it there just wasn't the demand for it it's just
hard to sell um all right so so there was a key
decision uh that i had something to do with all
right and that saved him there really in benson's
personality did he laugh much did he no he was
always just in the meetings there was never much
said and uh he got to the point pretty quickly
didn't he oh yeah yeah and it was uh it was well
thought out anything he did was well thought out he
was good to work for and i didn't have a bit of
trouble working for him we just had i mean he knew
that i wasn't back down anymore i i expressed my
opinion he didn't like it but he respected it and
then he told me later i think he really it hurt him
that he couldn't handle it better than he did in
your early years as department head who were your
key associates uh as department heads elsewhere
in the college in engineering and anywhere else oh
well actually in those years i knew all the
department heads real well but who were the ones
you worked with uh most well i worked i knew some man
real well he and i were well acquainted describe
him well he was uh very precise uh and very fair and
uh i had a lot of respect for him and uh he did for me
and what what describe him physically